# Cross-os2emx

This is a cross compilation toolchain for `i686-pc-os2-emx` target.

This consists of `binutils`, `gcc`, `LIBCn`, `meson`, `CMake`, `libtool`, and some build tools.

* `binutils` is v2.44 from https://github.com/psmedley/binutils-os2
* `gcc` is v15.2.0 from https://github.com/psmedley/gcc-os2
* `LIBCn` is v0.1.14 from https://github.com/bitwiseworks/libc
* `meson` is v1.11.1 from https://github.com/mesonbuild/meson
* `CMake` is v3.31.7 from https://github.com/bitwiseworks/cmake-os2
* `libtool` is v2.5.4 from https://github.com/komh/libtool-os2

Tested hosts:
* x86\_64-unknown-linux-gnu
* x86\_64-apple-darwin
* aarch64-apple-darwin

# History

* cross-os2emx v1.3.1 (2026/06/20)
    * Fixed `c_args` and `cpp_args` of `meson` is in `[properties]` section not in `[built-in options]` section.

* cross-os2emx v1.3.0 (2026/06/19)
    * Added `-Zsym` support to `emxbind` and `ld`
    * Added include path for `os2tk45` to the cross files of `meson` and `CMake`
    * Added `setemxenv` script to help to set env vars for `cross-os2emx`
        * Use `source setemxenv` or use alias for this
    * Added `meson` v1.11.1
    * macOS: Added `lxlite` stub
    * macOS: Updated `kdllar`
    * Fixed `emxbind -s` command and `strip` command for aout binaries
    * Linux: Fixed `kmapsym` does not recognize `Address Export Alias` block

* cross-os2emx v1.2.0 (2026/05/26)
    * Added macOS support by @josch1710
    * Added `lxLite` v1.3.9 and `kmapsym` for Linux
    * Added `__declspec(dllexport)` support to the aout linker, `ld` and `emxbind`
    * Updated `kdllar` to v1.4.0
    * Updated the executables in `extras` to statically linked versions
    * Fixed `-Zomf -Zsyms` does not generate `.sym` file. Issue #8
    * Fixed `Unix Makefiles` generator of `CMake` fails compile tests. Issue #12
    * Fixed `kdllar` fails on macOS due to `__.SYMDEF`. Issue #28
    * Fixed `emxbind` does not recognize a.out files with old-EMX startup code. Issue #30
    * Fixed misc.

* cross-os2emx v1.1.1 (2026/04/02)
    * Added `_envargs()` support
        * Now `EMXOMFOPT` for emxomf, `EMXOMFSTRIPOPT` for emxomfstrip, `GASOPT` for as, and `GCCOPT` for gcc are supported.
    * Updated `kdllar` to support response files
    * Fixed misc.

* cross-os2emx v1.1.0 (2026/03/29)
    * Updated `binutils` to v2.44
    * Updated `gcc` to v15.2.0
    * Added `libtool` v2.5.4
    * Added response file support to emx tools
    * Fixed `emxaout` fails on OMF object files generated by cross-os2emx. Issue #7
    * Fixed build problems due to `autotools`.
      * Now `autoconf` v2.69, `automake` v1.18.1, and `libtool` v2.5.4 are built and used internally
    * Fixed the sources including `fenv.h` in C++ could not be linked
    * Fixed misc.

* cross-os2emx v1.0.0 (2026/03/15)
    * Renamed to `cross-os2emx`
    * Added 64-bit version of `wl` and `wrc`
    * Added `kdllar` v1.3.0, `nasm` v3.01, `ninja` v1.13.1, and `cmake` v3.31.7
    * Added shared `libgcc` and `libstdc++-v3`
    * Added `libssp`
    * Added cross build definition files for `Meson`
      (i686-pc-os2-emx-aout.txt for aout, and i686-pc-os2-emx-omf.txt for omf in /path/to/opt/os2emx/share/meson/cross)
    * Added a basic cross file for `CMake`
      (i686-pc-os2-emx.cmake in /path/to/opt/os2emx/share/cmake/cross)
    * Added `installrpmzip` to install additional libs from netlabs rpm server
    * Fixed bashism. Issue #4. Reported by Dave Yeo
    * Fixed ICE due to `__declspec(dllexport)`. Issue #9
    * Fixed misc.

* os2emx-cross-toolchain-b1 (2026/02/23)
    * Released at `github`

* os2emx-cross-toolchain-test2 (2026/02/19)
    * Added `emxomf`, `emxomfar`, `emxomfld`, `emxomfstrip`, `listomf` and `stripomf`
        * `emxomfld` supports only `WLINK`
    * Added `-Zomf` option with watcom tools such as `wlink` and `wrc`
    * Fixed symbolic link problems

* os2emx-cross-toolchain-test1 (2026/02/15)
    * Added `binutils` v2.33.1
    * Added `emxexp`, `emximp`, `emxbind` and OS/2 `ld`
    * Added `gcc` v9.2.0
        * Always link to `libgcc.a`

# How to use

Here are the examples.

1. Set env vars for cross-os2emx

You should set env vars such as PATH for cross-os2emx like:

```
. setemxenv
```

2. autotools

```
./configure --host=i686-pc-os2-emx
```

3. meson

For `aout`:
```
meson setup build_dir -Dos2_emxomf=false --cross-file=$HOME/opt/os2emx/share/meson/cross/i686-pc-os2-emx-aout.txt
```

You can omit `-Dos2_emxomf=false` for aout.

For `omf`:

```
meson setup build_dir -Dos2_emxomf=true --cross-file=$HOME/opt/os2emx/share/meson/cross/i686-pc-os2-emx-omf.txt
```

4. CMake

```
cmake -S . -B build_dir -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=$HOME/opt/os2emx/share/cmake/cross/i686-pc-os2-emx.cmake
```

5. Others

```
export CC=i686-pc-os2-emx-gcc
export CXX=i686-pc-os2-emx-g++
export AR=i686-pc-os2-emx-ar
export STRIP=i686-pc-os2-emx-strip
and so on
```

If you use `-Zomf` to compile sources not to link, then you should set `AR` to `i686-pc-os2-emx-emxomfar` like:

```
export AR=i686-pc-os2-emx-emxomfar
```

**NOTE**: You should modify the path to/in the above files to the proper ones according to your system env.

# How to install additional libs with `installrpmzip`

1. Find the necessary libs at https://rpm.netlabs.org/release/00/zip

2. Copy the package name including `.zip` not the URL

3. Execute `installrpmzip` with the package name. For example, if you want to install pthread:
```
    /path/to/opt/os2emx/bin/installrpmzip pthread-0_2_6-1_oc00.zip
```

# How to build

1. Clone the sources from github:
    `git clone https://github.com/komh/cross-os2emx.git`

2. Bootstrap:
    `./bootstrap`

3. Build:
    `make`

4. Install:
    `make install`

    This will install the built files into `$HOME/opt/os2emx`.

* **NOTE 1**: Some tools and libs such as `gettext`, `autopoint`, `textinfo`, `flex`, `bison`, and so on are required by `binutils` and `gcc`.
* **NOTE 2**: `libssl` and `libcrypto` of `openssl` are required by `CMake`.
* **NOTE 3**: `wget`, `tar`, and `unzip` are required to download and to extract `autotools` and `LIBCn` binaries.
* **NOTE 4**: Unless you set `PREFIXROOT`, `PREFIXROOT` is set to `$HOME` by default. If you want to set PREFIXROOT to other directory than **$HOME**. then you should set **PREFIXROOT** to the same value **WHENEVER** calling **make**. For example,

```
    make PREFIXROOT=/
    make install PREFIXROOT=/
```
This will install into `$PREFIXROOT/opt/os2emx`.

# Known problems

* Some .so files are missing in pre-built binaries such as `libiconv.so.2` and `libmpfr.so.4` and so on. For this, see https://github.com/komh/cross-os2emx/issues/2.

# Donation

If you are satisfied with this program and want to donate to me, please visit
the following URL.

https://www.os2.kr/komh/os2factory/

Or, please click the Ads in the following blog.

https://lvzuufx.blogspot.com/

# Contact

Please use the issue tracker of github:

https://github.com/komh/cross-os2emx/issues

KO Myung-Hun
